Memoize using defined? (#111)
andycroll/andycroll.com: _posts/2021/2021-02-08-use-enhanced-memoization-for-false-nil-with-defined.md

---
title: "Use Enhanced Memoization for false/nil with defined?"
description: "Memoizing false & nil results requires more formality"
layout: article
category: ruby
image:
  base: "2021/use-enhanced-memoization-for-false-nil-with-defined"
  alt: "true, false & nil word cloud"
---

> One straightforward performance optimization we discussed using was [memoization using the `||=` operator](ruby/memoize-expensive-operations) however this isn't a solution in all cases.

Reviewer: *we discussed in the last/in a previous issue was... . However, this isn't a _suitable_ solution in all cases.

Reviewer: Maybe hint high-level at which sort of cases it won't work for in the intro?

> One straightforward performance optimisation I have demonstrated was [memoization using the `||=` operator](ruby/memoize-expensive-operations) however this isn't a suitable solution for cases when the expensive operation might result in `false` or `nil`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One straightforward performance optimisation I have previously discussed is [memoization using the `||=` operator](ruby/memoize-expensive-operations). However, this isn't a suitable solution for cases when the expensive operation might result in `false` or `nil`.
```

Author: ```suggestion
[Memoization using the `||=` operator](ruby/memoize-expensive-operations) is a useful and straightforward performance optimisation. However this isn't a suitable solution for cases when the expensive operation might result in `false` or `nil`.
```

## Instead of ...

...repeating potentially expensive calculations:

```ruby
class OldTimeySweetShop
  def any_jars_nearly_empty?
    @any_jars_nearly_empty ||= glass_jars.any? do |jar|
      jar.count_each_sweet_by_hand < 10
    end
  end
end
```

## Use...

...the `defined?` method with an early return.

```ruby
class OldTimeySweetShop
  def any_jars_nearly_empty?
    return @any_jars_nearly_empty if defined?(@any_jars_nearly_empty)
  
    @any_jars_nearly_empty = glass_jars.any? do |jar|
      jar.count_each_sweet_by_hand < 10
    end
  end
end
```

## Why?

Use of the `#defined?` method is technically the more "correct" way to perform memoization.

The `||=` (or equals) operator literally means:

```ruby
a || a = possibly_expensive_computation
```

> A consequence of this is that if `a` is "false-y", meaning set to `nil` or `false`, then right-hand side of the `||` is executed. This is a big issue if the expensive computation can return false, it will be run every time the method is used, completely circumventing the improvement we are attempting.

Reviewer: *This is a potentially a big issue as if the expensive computer can return `false`, it will be run every time...

> A consequence of this is that if `a` is "false-y", meaning set to `nil` or `false`, then right-hand side of the `||` is executed. This is a potentially a big issue as if the expensive computation can return `false`, it will be run every time the method is used, completely circumventing the improvement we are attempting.

Reviewer: *then _the_ right-hand side..._will be_ executed.

Reviewer: *is potentially a big issue, since if the expensive computer is legitimately/currently/actually returning `false`, it will be run every time...

Author: ```suggestion
A consequence of this is that if `a` is "false-y", meaning set to `nil` or `false`, then the right-hand side of the `||` is executed. This is a potentially a big issue, since if the expensive computation is legitimately returning `false`, it will be run every time the method is used, completely circumventing the improvement we are attempting.
```

> I've used `Enumerable#any?` deliberately above to illustrate that this technique can be useful in the output of methods that loop over large datasets and return a boolean or `nil` result.

Reviewer: So maybe in the intro say something like: "However not great when looping over large datasets and..."

> I've used `Enumerable#any?` above to illustrate that this `defined?`-based technique can be useful to improve performance for methods that loop over large datasets and return a boolean or `nil` result.

Reviewer: *might return a boolean...

Author: ```suggestion
I've used `Enumerable#any?` above to illustrate that this `defined?`-based technique can be useful to improve performance for methods that loop over large datasets and might return a boolean or `nil` result.
```

## Why not?

> Often, a memoized result won't be `nil` or `false` and in that case this style is undoubtably less attractive to read when you come back to it.

Reviewer: *to read and <insert some words that imply you're trying to remember what your code does> ??(Maybe...)

> Often, a memoized result won't be `nil` or `false` and in that case this style is undoubtably less attractive to read (and possibly understand?) when you return to it later on.

Reviewer: Comma needed after `false`

Reviewer: Isn't readability tied to understandability/ease of getting up-to-scratch...if it's just about attractiveness to read, is that a big enough of a pain point?

Author: ```suggestion
Often, a memoized result won't be `nil` or `false`, and in that case this style is undoubtably more visually noisy to read and possibly trickier to understand when you come back to it later on.
```

---
title: "Use Enhanced Memoization for false/nil with defined?"
description: "Memoizing false & nil results requires more formality"
layout: article
category: ruby
image:
  base: "2021/use-enhanced-memoization-for-false-nil-with-defined"
  alt: "true, false & nil word cloud"
---

> [Memoization using the `||=` operator](ruby/memoize-expensive-operations) is a useful and straightforward performance optimisation. However this isn't a suitable solution for cases when the expensive operation might result in `false` or `nil`.

Reviewer: Yay — much better!

Comma after "However", methinks though!

Author: ```suggestion
[Memoization using the `||=` operator](ruby/memoize-expensive-operations) is a useful and straightforward performance optimisation. However, this isn't a suitable solution for cases when the expensive operation might result in `false` or `nil`.
```

## Instead of ...

...repeating potentially expensive calculations:

```ruby
class OldTimeySweetShop
  def any_jars_nearly_empty?
    @any_jars_nearly_empty ||= glass_jars.any? do |jar|
      jar.count_each_sweet_by_hand < 10
    end
  end
end
```

## Use...

...the `defined?` method with an early return.

```ruby
class OldTimeySweetShop
  def any_jars_nearly_empty?
    return @any_jars_nearly_empty if defined?(@any_jars_nearly_empty)

    @any_jars_nearly_empty = glass_jars.any? do |jar|
      jar.count_each_sweet_by_hand < 10
    end
  end
end
```

## Why?

Use of the `#defined?` method is technically the more "correct" way to perform memoization.

The `||=` (or equals) operator literally means:

```ruby
a || a = possibly_expensive_computation
```

> A consequence of this is that if `a` is "false-y", meaning set to `nil` or `false`, then the right-hand side of the `||` is executed. This is a potentially a big issue, since if the expensive computation is legitimately returning `false`, it will be run every time the method is used, completely circumventing the improvement we are attempting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A consequence of this is that if `a` is "false-y", meaning set to `nil` or `false`, then the right-hand side of the `||` is executed. This is potentially a big issue because if the expensive computation is legitimately returning `false`, it will be run every time the method is used, completely circumventing the improvement we are attempting.
```

I've used `Enumerable#any?` above to illustrate that this `defined?`-based technique can be useful to improve performance for methods that loop over large datasets and might return a boolean or `nil` result.

## Why not?

> Often, a memoized result won't be `nil` or `false`, and in that case this style is undoubtably more visually noisy to read and possibly trickier to understand when you come back to it later on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Often, a memoized result won't be `nil` or `false`, and in that case this style is undoubtably more visually noisy to read, and possibly trickier to understand, when you come back to it later on.
```

### Beware Threads!

> You should be careful when using memoization in a high-throughput, threaded Ruby environment. You probably are; `sidekiq` is threaded and many Ruby web servers are as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should be careful when using memoization in a high-throughput, threaded Ruby environment. You probably are. `sidekiq` is threaded and many Ruby web servers are as well.
```

> When your code is reaching _outside_ of the Ruby interpreter (e.g. reusable database connections, file handling, writing to a data store, manually creating background threads) it is possible to introduce race conditions if your code is called by multiple threads at the same time. However… you’re unlikely to be doing this in the course of day to day application, but it is a possible source of bugs. So be aware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When your code is reaching _outside_ of the Ruby interpreter (e.g. reusable database connections, file handling, writing to a data store, manually creating background threads) it is possible to introduce race conditions if your code is called by multiple threads at the same time. However, you’re unlikely to be doing this in the course of a day-to-day application. Still, it is a possible source of bugs, so be aware!
```

> When your code is reaching _outside_ of the Ruby interpreter (e.g. reusable database connections, file handling, writing to a data store, manually creating background threads) it is possible to introduce race conditions if your code is called by multiple threads at the same time. However, you’re unlikely to be doing this in the course of a day-to-day application. Still, it is a possible source of bugs, so be aware!

Author: ```suggestion
When your code is reaching _outside_ of the Ruby interpreter (e.g. reusable database connections, file handling, writing to a data store, manually creating background threads) it is possible to introduce race conditions if your code is called by multiple threads at the same time. However, you’re unlikely to be doing this in the course of a day-to-day application. Still, it is a possible source of bugs, so be aware!
```

> Hat tip to Ivo on this one, he's resolved [bugs in open source projects](https://github.com/DataDog/dd-trace-rb/pull/1329) that demonstrate this issue. You can see his recorded talk on [spotting unsafe ruby patterns](https://ivoanjo.me/blog/2018/10/13/spotting-unsafe-ruby-patterns/) which dives into the details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hat tip to Ivo on this one. He's resolved [bugs in open source projects](https://github.com/DataDog/dd-trace-rb/pull/1329) that demonstrate this issue. You can see his recorded talk on [spotting unsafe ruby patterns](https://ivoanjo.me/blog/2018/10/13/spotting-unsafe-ruby-patterns/), which dives into the details.
```
